Microclimatic spatial variation buffers local warming in alpine
vegetation
================

B Jiménez-Alfaro, E Fernández-Pascual, A Bueno, C Marcenó….¿?

# Abstract (ME&B)

Alpine vegetation is considered to respond to climate change through
species distribution shifts with effects on community richness and
composition. However, the complex topography of alpine landscapes
creates a mosaic of microclimatic niches which might buffer
macroclimatic variation, preventing local extinctions of alpine species.
The magnitude of microclimatic buffering is context-dependent and may
depend on regional factors such as biogeographical settings, topography,
or species pools. A key question for understanding the magnitude of this
buffering is therefore to test whether spatial topographic variation
reflects temporal changes within and between years in different regions.
We addressed this question in a long-term vegetation monitoring site in
Picos de Europa National Park, a transitional mountain massif between
the temperate and Mediterranean macroclimates in northern Spain. In
2008, we established four stations along an alpine landscape for
measuring temporal changes in soil temperatures and related changes in
plant communities based on two 1 m2 plots replicated around the central
point. In 2018, we also measured spatial variation in soil temperatures
within each station using 20 additional plots placed at 10 m intervals
along with cardinal directions from the central point. We found that
spatial variation was higher than 10-year temporal variation for most of
the bioclimatic indices we used, but there were exceptions in stations
that accumulate less snow, and in less topographically diverse stations.
Vegetation variation (Sørensen index) was higher across topographical
gradients than across time. These results suggest that microclimatic
refugia can compensate for temporal changes, but this compensation might
not be homogeneous throughout the alpine landscape. The response of the
study system to contemporary climate warming seems more likely to
produce a slow re-accommodation of species relative abundances along
with topographical variation, rather than local extinctions.

# Introduction

xxx

# Methods

## Study system

The study was conducted in the calcareous massif of Picos de Europa
National Park, in northern Spain (Figure 1A). The study area is a
biodiversity hotspot for cold-adapted plants in the Iberian Peninsula
and a biogeographical hub for Alpine and Mediterranean lineages in
Western Europe (XXX). The main calcareous massif occupies c. 50 km2 and
support high diversity of ecosystems, with alpine vegetation mostly
occurring between 1900 and 2400 m a.s.l., with a local species pool of
XX species (Jiménez-Alfaro et al. XXX). In 2008, we established a
long-term ecological research program for monitoring soil climate and
vegetation change. We selected four study sites along a north-south
gradient, reflecting the main macroclimatic variation from oceanic to
Mediterranean influence. In 2016, we additionally installed a Water
potential logger (XXX) to characterize water stress in the four sites
and to …. The sites were selected to… general design and description of
sites… (Borja)

> Empiezo a pensar que sería mejor quitar esto, por mucho que me
> fastidie, y guardarnos el tema del WP para otro paper junto con lo de
> Omaña. Eso simplificaría el gráfico (de otro modo, tendría más lógica
> ponerlo con la Figura 1, porque en realidad no hacemos nada con esto)

## Vegetation and microclimatic data

In each site, we buried a temperature logger (XXXX) at 5 cm depth in a
relatively flat and homogeneous vegetation patch. We surveyed the plant
community in two replicated plots of 1 m2 separated 1 m from the logger,
identifying species composition and estimating relative cover in %. In
each plot, we installed a grid template of 100 microplots (10 x 10 cm
each) to sample species frequency according to the standard methodology
of GLORIA (XXX). The loggers were replaced by new ones, when needed, to
obtain a continuous temperature record from 2008 to 2018. In 2018, we
resampled the same plots in the same way to detect potential changes in
species presence and frequency. The vegetation data from these surveys,
together with the soil temperature collected in the four study sites
during 10 years, represent the “temporal survey.” In 2019, we visited
the same areas to study the spatial variation of vegetation and
microclimate around the previously sampled areas. Using the long-term
temperature logger as the central point, we additionally placed 20
ibuttons (XXX) in 20 plots of 1 m2 separated 10 m from each other in the
four cardinal directions (Figure 1C).. etc… (Borja)

## Data analysis

([R Core Team 2020](#ref-RN2315))

Vegetation data + Temperature data (Eduardo)

# Results

## Microclimatic variation

Along the 10 years of soil temperature monitoring, we found a general
trend of increasing temperature, especially in the southwest and warmest
site (Hoyo sin Tierra) (Figure 3). Two of the sites (Los Cazadores and
Los Boches) showed a consistent pattern of continuous snow cover during
winter (reflected by temperature records around 0º C). In contrast, the
two other sites (Hoy Sin Tierri and Hoyo Sin Tierra) showed frost
temperatures during most winters (although they may not be constant and
intermixed with short snow periods). Maximum temperatures were… Soil
temperature corresponding to the spatial surveys also showed high
variation within sites (Figure 3). In the four sites we found plots with
contrasting patterns of snow cover and frost during winter, reflected
by… When looking at the whole microclimatic variation among plots
(Figure 4), we found that the four sites were represented by a wide
range of temperatures, with the exception of one site (Los Cazadores).
The two main axes of variation were mainly related to FDD and GDD, the
latter also correlated with…. (Eduardo)

## Plant diversity and microclimate

In the temporal survey (2 plots per site, n =16), we recorded XX species
in 2008 and XX in 2018. (species loss, gains)… Changes in species
frequency were/were not correlated with XX and XX…. (Table 1) (Eduardo).
In the spatial survey (20 plots per site, n = 80; including four plots
placed in rocks with no plants) we recorded XX species. Changes in
species composition were associated to GDD (NMDS axis 1) to represent a
main gradient from the warmest to the coldest sites (Figure 4), and to
FDD (NMDS2) in a gradient of snow versus frost winters. In the
compositional space, the sites were poorly differentiated across the
four sites (PERMANOVA, adonis) mainly by the effect of one site (Los
Boches) with most plots places in the cold and frost margins. Etc….
(Borja).

## Microclimatic ranges in time and space

…. (Eduardo) (quizás repensar esta parte, pero es importante mantenerla
porque es la clave).

<div id="refs" class="references csl-bib-body">

<div id="ref-RN2315" class="csl-entry">

****R Core Team****. **2020**. <span class="nocase">R: a language and
environment for statistical computing. Version 4.0.3.</span>

</div>

</div>
